---
layout: portfolio
title: An iOS app for resolving who owes what
---

#### Design a digital product or service to help people manage group payments and keep track of money owed. Eliminate the awkwardness and uncertainty around lending money with friends.

### Challenge and scope
Keeping track of who-owes-who-what situations is difficult. Whether it’s paying bills among housemates, settling up for dinner, or borrowing cash from a friend – it’s easy to lose track of things or get in a muddle over money.

Current DIY solutions – spreadsheets, IOU notes, group noticeboards etc. tend to be one-sided, relying on the diligence and calculations of one individual. Where our money is involved we want certainty that we’re being treated fairly.
A digital ‘middle man’ service could monitor these exchanges with transparency, mitigating the tensions that usually come with borrowing money. An open and accurate record would remove disputes or inaccuracies over who owes what.

### What will make it a success?
- Lending money between friends and 
groups becomes a more relaxed and good-natured thing.
- Friends feel happy buying things for each other, helping each other out financially.
- A person can take responsibility for a bill or payment without worry – knowing they’ll be reimbursed quickly and fully.
- Remember: we’re sharing money among friends, not legally binding client invoices. Using the product should be a quick, friendly gesture. An expression of trust. Definitely not a chore!

## The survey
To understand the full breadth of the problem, I put out a survey among 100 or so fellow students, staff and tutors — asking for their stories, issues and experiences of borrowing money or splitting payments among friends.

### Analysis
Around 80 came back. Most were full of useful insights, figures and anecdotes as well as many common themes and pain points. These could be grouped into independent scenarios where issues arose and the product might intervene:

- One-off, group events: Splitting one payment among multiple people.
- Recurring, group-based events: House bills, rotas
Group payment, unequal split: 
splitting a restaurant bill, each person paying a different amount
- 1–2–1 transactions: ‘I owe you £x for y’, your round at the pub, picking up the bill for a friend
- Long term, large-scale debts: “I owe my 
family thousands”

## Empathy maps
Moving on, I picked out potential user groups from the research and did an empathy mapping exercise for each. Helping to understand users’ different points of view, identify pain points, and think about how I might solve them.

## Personas
The empathy maps were developed further into personas. Specific people, potential users of the product — representative of our audience, whose problems encapsulated the key issues surfaced through user research.

Doing this, I’m able to keep specific people in mind when designing the product. If I’ve successfully solved their problems, theory says I’ll have covered most issues for all of my users.

## User Journeys
I then mapped out the personas' individual tasks – all the steps they'd take to solve their problem and how the app would fit into that. This all helped pin down the range of functions the product would need to fulfil and gave a guide for the information architecture.

## Sketching

### Messaging pattern
I decided on a messaging style architecture for the product. Here’s why:
- People owing money to each other is always essentially a one-to-one relationship. Even if there’s a big payment split among many people, debts will always boil down to X-owes-Y £n.
- A sequence of ‘I paid for this, she paid for that’ events would naturally then start to resemble a conversation, a back and forth dialog between two people.
- On your phone, one-to-one relationships with friends almost all live inside messaging apps.
- The ‘messaging-conversation model’ is well understood by the average smartphone user. Less to learn for first-time users.

# First prototypes

# Notifications and reminders

### Handling reminders
One of the key findings from research was that most of the tension and awkwardness in relationships came from having to chase friends up or deal with someone who’d forgotten to pay you back. Nobody likes to have to ask a friend for money — you feel like you’re showing a lack of trust, they feel guilty for letting a friend down.

An app would be ideally placed to deal with this — acting as a neutral ‘middle man’ to deal with chasing up and asking for money in a much less personal way.

### hello, DebtBot
So why not personify this ‘middle man’ character into the product? A ‘dumb AI’ of sorts, to help you keep on top of your debts to friends and ensure you pay up well before any feelings turn sour. I’ve called it DebtBot for now… it’ll have a proper name soon enough.

I first explored the idea of DebtBot having its own home within the app. A separate screen you’d visit for notifications and reminders around paying your friends. On reflection however, and after trying the idea out on friends, it felt odd having such reminders separate from the context of the relationship it referred to. Instead, I moved it inline with each relationship.


## Visual language – thoughts

### When one person owes another money…
- There’s a bond between them – it’s a symbol of trust and friendship
- There is tension (potential energy?)
- There’s an inequality that wants to be resolved
Starts out good-willed – doing someone a favour (should be encouraged)
- This sense of balance, energy and motion might play with these dynamics through visuals and animation.

### Security
With anything dealing with your money, you want to feel secure. Even if my product never handles real money, users should feel that theirs is safe.

### Healthy relationships
When two people owe each other money they’re effectively bound together until the debt is settled. If they both pull their weight in the relationship, taking turns to pay for things, the balance of who-owes-who should naturally swing back and forth, like two friends on a seesaw. This healthy back and forth should be encouraged.

### Use DebtBot’s personality
DebtBot will have a visual presence in the product, and its personality could be tailored to complement the overall product visual language. For example – a more irreverant, dry humoured DebtBot could offset and humanise a neutral, security minded overall product.

### Make room for play
This a place for friends to be friends. Make them feel comfortable, fool around a little. It shouldn’t take itself too seriously.

